# Summa Theologica

Ad secundum dicendum quod ratio illa procedit de peccato secundum se.
        
Reply to Objection 2:
 This objection considers sin essentially as such:
      


Et similiter dicendum est ad tertium.
        
Objection 3:
 and the same answer applies to the Third Objection.

Ad tertium dicendum quod Deus non delectatur in poenis propter ipsas; sed delectatur in ordine suae iustitiae, quae haec requirit.
        
Reply to Objection 3:
 God does not delight in punishments for their own sake; but He does delight in the order of His justice, which requires them.




Ad quartum dicendum quod poena, etsi per accidens ordinetur ad naturam, per se tamen ordinatur ad privationem ordinis et ad Dei iustitiam. Et ideo, durante inordinatione, semper durat poena.
        
Reply to Objection 4:
 Although punishment is related indirectly to nature, nevertheless it is essentially related to the disturbance of the order, and to God's justice. Wherefore, so long as the disturbance lasts, the punishment endures.

Et similiter dicendum est ad tertium, de veniali peccato. Aeternitas enim poenae non respondet quantitati culpae, sed irremissibilitati ipsius, ut dictum est.
        

          The same answer applies to the Third Objection about venial sin. Because eternity of punishment does not correspond to the quantity of the sin, but to its irremissibility, as stated above (
Article [3]
).

Ad tertium dicendum quod Christus poenam sustinuit satisfactoriam non pro suis, sed pro nostris peccatis.
        
Reply to Objection 3:
 Christ bore a satisfactory punishment, not for His, but for our sins.