# Summa Theologica

Ad primum ergo dicendum quod ratio illa procedit ex parte operationis. Et sequeretur conclusio si solam illam operationem importaret absque termino, qui est persona.
        
Reply to Objection 1:
 This reason regards the operation, and the conclusion would follow if it implied this operation only, without the term, which is a Person.




Ad secundum dicendum quod natura dicitur incarnata, sicut et assumens, ratione personae ad quam terminata est unio, sicut dictum est, non autem prout est communis tribus personis. Dicitur autem tota natura divina incarnata, non quia sit incarnata in omnibus personis, sed quia nihil deest de perfectione divinae naturae personae incarnatae.
        


Reply to Objection 2:
 The Nature is said to be incarnate, and to assume by reason of the Person in Whom the union is terminated, as stated above (
Articles [1]
,2), and not as it is common to the three Persons. Now "the whole Divine Nature is" said to be "incarnate"; not that It is incarnate in all the Persons, but inasmuch as nothing is wanting to the perfection of the Divine Nature of the Person incarnate, as Damascene explains there.




Ad tertium dicendum quod assumptio quae fit per gratiam adoptionis, terminatur ad quandam participationem divinae naturae secundum assimilationem ad bonitatem illius, secundum illud II Pet. I, ut divinae consortes naturae, et cetera. Et ideo huiusmodi assumptio communis est tribus personis et ex parte principii et ex parte termini. Sed assumptio quae est per gratiam unionis, est communis ex parte principii, non autem ex parte termini, ut dictum est.
        
Reply to Objection 3:
 The assumption which takes place by the grace of adoption is terminated in a certain participation of the Divine Nature, by an assimilation to Its goodness, according to 2 Pt. 1:4: "That you may be made partakers of the Divine Nature"; and hence this assumption is common to the three Persons, in regard to the principle and the term. But the assumption which is by the grace of union is common on the part of the principle, but not on the part of the term, as was said above.