# Summa Theologica

Unitas autem huius oblationis figurabatur in lege per hoc quod semel in anno legalis pontifex cum solemni oblatione sanguinis intrabat in sancta, ut dicitur Levit. XVI. Sed deficiebat figura a veritate in hoc, quod illa hostia non habebat sempiternam virtutem, et ideo annuatim illae hostiae reiterabantur.
        
As to the unity of this sacrifice, it was foreshadowed in the Law in that, once a year, the high-priest of the Law entered into the Holies, with a solemn oblation of blood, as set down, Lev. 16:11. But the figure fell short of the reality in this, that the victim had not an everlasting virtue, for which reason those sacrifices were renewed every year.

Ad primum ergo dicendum quod Christus non dicitur esse secundum ordinem Melchisedech quasi principalioris sacerdotis, sed quasi praefigurantis excellentiam sacerdotii Christi ad sacerdotium leviticum.
        
Reply to Objection 1:
 Christ is said to be according to the order of Melchisedech not as though the latter were a more excellent priest, but because he foreshadowed the excellence of Christ's over the Levitical priesthood.




Ad secundum dicendum quod in sacerdotio Christi duo possunt considerari, scilicet ipsa oblatio Christi, et participatio eius. Quantum autem ad ipsam oblationem, expressius figurabat sacerdotium Christi sacerdotium legale per sanguinis effusionem, quam sacerdotium Melchisedech in quo sanguis non effundebatur. Sed quantum ad participationem huius sacrificii et eius effectum, in quo praecipue attenditur excellentia sacerdotii Christi ad sacerdotium legale, expressius praefigurabatur per sacerdotium Melchisedech, qui offerebat panem et vinum, significantia, ut dicit Augustinus ecclesiasticam unitatem, quam constituit participatio sacrificii Christi. Unde etiam in nova lege verum Christi sacrificium communicatur fidelibus sub specie panis et vini.
        
Reply to Objection 2:
 Two things may be considered in Christ's priesthood: namely, the offering made by Christ, and (our) partaking thereof. As to the actual offering, the priesthood of Christ was more distinctly foreshadowed by the priesthood of the Law, by reason of the shedding of blood, than by the priesthood of Melchisedech in which there was no blood-shedding. But if we consider the participation of this sacrifice and the effect thereof, wherein the excellence of Christ's priesthood over the priesthood of the Law principally consists, then the former was more distinctly foreshadowed by the priesthood of Melchisedech, who offered bread and wine, signifying, as Augustine says (Tract. xxvi in Joan.) ecclesiastical unity, which is established by our taking part in the sacrifice of Christ [*Cf. Question [79], Article [1]]. Wherefore also in the New Law the true sacrifice of Christ is presented to the faithful under the form of bread and wine.




Ad tertium dicendum quod Melchisedech dictus est sine patre et sine matre et sine genealogia, et quod non habet initium dierum neque finem non quia ista non habuit, sed quia in Scriptura sacra ista de eo non leguntur. Et per hoc ipsum, ut apostolus ibidem dicit, assimilatus est filio Dei, qui in terris est sine patre, et in caelis sine matre et sine genealogia, secundum illud Isaiae LIII, generationem eius quis enarrabit? Et secundum divinitatem neque principium neque finem habet dierum.
        
Reply to Objection 3:
 Melchisedech is described as "without father, without mother, without genealogy," and as "having neither beginning of days nor ending of life," not as though he had not these things, but because these details in his regard are not supplied by Holy Scripture. And this it is that, as the Apostle says in the same passage, he is "likened unto the Son of God," Who had no earthly father, no heavenly mother, and no genealogy, according to Is. 53:8: "Who shall declare His generation?" and Who in His Godhead has neither beginning nor end of days.

Ad tertium dicendum quod Melchisedech dictus est sine patre et sine matre et sine genealogia, et quod non habet initium dierum neque finem non quia ista non habuit, sed quia in Scriptura sacra ista de eo non leguntur. Et per hoc ipsum, ut apostolus ibidem dicit, assimilatus est filio Dei, qui in terris est sine patre, et in caelis sine matre et sine genealogia, secundum illud Isaiae LIII, generationem eius quis enarrabit? Et secundum divinitatem neque principium neque finem habet dierum.
        
Reply to Objection 3:
 Melchisedech is described as "without father, without mother, without genealogy," and as "having neither beginning of days nor ending of life," not as though he had not these things, but because these details in his regard are not supplied by Holy Scripture. And this it is that, as the Apostle says in the same passage, he is "likened unto the Son of God," Who had no earthly father, no heavenly mother, and no genealogy, according to Is. 53:8: "Who shall declare His generation?" and Who in His Godhead has neither beginning nor end of days.