# Summa Theologica

Respondeo dicendum quod, sicut supra dictum est, Christus in primo instanti conceptionis suae sanctificatus fuit per gratiam. Est autem duplex sanctificatio, una quidem adultorum, qui secundum proprium actum sanctificantur; alia autem puerorum, qui non sanctificantur secundum proprium actum fidei, sed secundum fidem parentum vel Ecclesiae. Prima autem sanctificatio est perfectior quam secunda, sicut actus est perfectior quam habitus; et quod est per se, eo quod est per aliud. Cum ergo sanctificatio Christi fuerit perfectissima, quia sic sanctificatus est ut esset aliorum sanctificator; consequens est quod ipse secundum proprium motum liberi arbitrii in Deum fuerit sanctificatus. Qui quidem motus liberi arbitrii est meritorius. Unde consequens est quod in primo instanti suae conceptionis Christus meruerit.
        


I answer that,
 As stated above (
Article [1]
), Christ was sanctified by grace in the first instant of His conception. Now, sanctification is twofold: that of adults who are sanctified in consideration of their own act; and that of infants who are sanctified in consideration of, not their own act of faith, but that of their parents or of the Church. The former sanctification is more perfect than the latter: just as act is more perfect than habit; and "that which is by itself, than that which is by another" [*Aristotle, Phys. viii]. Since, therefore, the sanctification of Christ was most perfect, because He was so sanctified that He might sanctify others; consequently He was sanctified by reason of His own movement of the free-will towards God. Which movement, indeed, of the free-will is meritorious. Consequently, Christ did merit in the first instant of His conception.




Ad primum ergo dicendum quod liberum arbitrium non eodem modo se habet ad bonum et ad malum, nam ad bonum se habet per se et naturaliter; ad malum autem se habet per modum defectus, et praeter naturam. Sicut autem philosophus dicit, in II de caelo, posterius est quod est praeter naturam, eo quod est secundum naturam, quia id quod est praeter naturam, est quaedam excisio ab eo quod est secundum naturam. Et ideo liberum arbitrium creaturae in primo instanti creationis potest moveri ad bonum merendo, non autem ad malum peccando, si tamen natura sit integra.
        
Reply to Objection 1:
 Free-will does not bear the same relation to good as to evil: for to good it is related of itself, and naturally; whereas to evil it is related as to a defect, and beside nature. Now, as the Philosopher says (De Coelo ii, text. 18): "That which is beside nature is subsequent to that which is according to nature; because that which is beside nature is an exception to nature." Therefore the free-will of a creature can be moved to good meritoriously in the first instant of its creation, but not to evil sinfully; provided, however, its nature be unimpaired.




Ad secundum dicendum quod id quod homo habet in principio suae creationis secundum communem naturae cursum, est homini naturale, nihil tamen prohibet quin aliqua creatura in principio suae creationis aliquod beneficium gratiae a Deo consequatur. Et hoc modo anima Christi in principio suae creationis consecuta est gratiam, qua posset mereri. Et ea ratione gratia illa, secundum quandam similitudinem, dicitur fuisse illi homini naturalis, ut patet per Augustinum, in Enchirid.
        
Reply to Objection 2:
 That which man has at the first moment of his creation, in the ordinary course of nature, is natural to him. but nothing hinders a creature from receiving from God a gift of grace at the very beginning of its creation. In this way did Christ's soul in the first instant of its creation receive grace by which it could merit. And for this reason is that grace, by way of a certain likeness, said to be natural to this Man, as explained by Augustine (Enchiridion xl).




Ad tertium dicendum quod nihil prohibet idem esse alicuius ex diversis causis. Et secundum hoc, Christus gloriam immortalitatis, quam meruit in primo instanti suae conceptionis, potuit etiam posterioribus actibus et passionibus mereri, non quidem ut esset sibi magis debita; sed ut sibi ex pluribus causis deberetur.
        
Reply to Objection 3:
 Nothing prevents the same thing belonging to someone from several causes. And thus it is that Christ was able by subsequent actions and sufferings to merit the glory of immortality, which He also merited in the first instant of His conception: not, indeed, so that it became thereby more due to Him than before, but so that it was due to Him from more causes than before.

Ad primum ergo dicendum quod, sicut supra dictum est, Christus non meruit gloriam animae, secundum quam dicitur comprehensor, sed gloriam corporis, ad quam per suam passionem pervenit.
        


Reply to Objection 1:
 As stated above (
Question [19]
, 
Article [3]
), Christ did not merit the glory of the soul, in respect of which He is said to have been a comprehensor, but the glory of the body, to which He came through His Passion.




Unde patet responsio ad secundum.
        
Wherefore the reply to the Second Objection is clear.
      


Ad tertium dicendum quod Christus, ex hoc quod fuit Deus et homo, etiam in sua humanitate habuit aliquid prae ceteris creaturis, ut scilicet statim a principio esset beatus.
        
Reply to Objection 3:
 Since Christ was both God and man, He had, even in His humanity, something more than other creatures---namely, that He was in the state of beatitude from the very beginning.