# Summa Theologica

Ad tertium dicendum quod, sicut apostolus dicit, Christus in omnibus tentari voluit, absque peccato. Tentatio autem quae est ab hoste, potest esse sine peccato, quia fit per solam exteriorem suggestionem. Tentatio autem quae est a carne, non potest esse sine peccato, quia haec tentatio fit per delectationem et concupiscentiam; et, sicut Augustinus dicit, nonnullum peccatum est cum caro concupiscit adversus spiritum. Et ideo Christus tentari voluit ab hoste, sed non a carne.
        


Reply to Objection 3:
 As the Apostle says (
Heb. 4:15
), Christ wished to be "tempted in all things, without sin." Now temptation which comes from an enemy can be without sin: because it comes about by merely outward suggestion. But temptation which comes from the flesh cannot be without sin, because such a temptation is caused by pleasure and concupiscence; and, as Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xix), "it is not without sin that 'the flesh desireth against the spirit.'" And hence Christ wished to be tempted by an enemy, but not by the flesh.

Ad tertium dicendum quod, sicut Ambrosius dicit, super Luc., recessit Diabolus a Christo usque ad tempus, quia postea, non tentaturus, sed aperte pugnaturus advenit, tempore scilicet passionis. Et tamen per illam impugnationem videbatur Christum tentare de tristitia et odio proximorum, sicut in deserto de delectatione gulae et contemptu Dei per idololatriam.
        
Reply to Objection 3:
 As Ambrose says on Lk. 4:13, the devil departed from Christ "for a time, because, later on, he returned, not to tempt Him, but to assail Him openly"---namely, at the time of His Passion. Nevertheless, He seemed in this later assault to tempt Christ to dejection and hatred of His neighbor; just as in the desert he had tempted Him to gluttonous pleasure and idolatrous contempt of God.

Ad sextum dicendum quod Christus, cum passus fuisset tentationis iniuriam, dicente sibi Diabolo, si filius Dei es, mitte te deorsum, non est turbatus, nec Diabolum increpavit. Quando vero Diabolus Dei usurpavit sibi honorem, dicens, haec omnia tibi dabo si cadens adoraveris me, exasperatus est et repulit eum, dicens, vade, Satanas, ut nos illius discamus exemplo nostras quidem iniurias magnanimiter sustinere, Dei autem iniurias nec usque ad auditum sufferre.
        
Reply to Objection 6:
 When Christ had suffered the wrong of being tempted by the devil saying, "If Thou be the Son of God cast Thyself down," He was not troubled, nor did He upbraid the devil. But when the devil usurped to himself the honor due to God, saying, "All these things will I give Thee, if, falling down, Thou wilt adore me," He was exasperated, and repulsed him, saying, "Begone, Satan": that we might learn from His example to bear bravely insults leveled at ourselves, but not to allow ourselves so much as to listen to those which are aimed at God.




Ad septimum dicendum quod, sicut Chrysostomus dicit, Diabolus sic Christum assumebat (in pinnaculum templi) ut ab omnibus videretur, ipse autem, nesciente Diabolo, sic agebat ut a nemine videretur.
        
Reply to Objection 7:
 As Chrysostom says (Hom. v in Matth.): "The devil set Him" (on a pinnacle of the Temple) "that He might be seen by all, whereas, unawares to the devil, He acted in such sort that He was seen by none."




Quod autem dicit, ostendit ei omnia regna mundi et gloriam eorum, non est intelligendum quod videret ipsa regna vel civitates vel populos, vel aurum vel argentum, sed partes in quibus unumquodque regnum vel civitas posita est, Diabolus Christo digito demonstrabat, et uniuscuiusque regni honores et statum verbis exponebat. Vel, secundum Origenem, ostendit ei quomodo ipse per diversa vitia regnabat in mundo.
        
In regard to the words, "'He showed Him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them,' we are not to understand that He saw the very kingdoms, with the cities and inhabitants, their gold and silver: but that the devil pointed out the quarters in which each kingdom or city lay, and set forth to Him in words their glory and estate." Or, again, as Origen says (Hom. xxx in Luc.), "he showed Him how, by means of the various vices, he was the lord of the world."