# Summa Theologica

Utrumque autem circa Christum erat hominibus manifestandum, scilicet quod Deus esset in eo per gratiam, non adoptionis, sed unionis; et quod eius supernaturalis doctrina esset a Deo. Et ideo convenientissimum fuit ut miracula faceret. Unde ipse dicit, Ioan. X, si mihi non vultis credere, operibus credite. Et Ioan. V, opera quae dedit mihi pater ut faciam, ipsa sunt quae testimonium perhibent de me.
        

          Now both these things were to be made known to men concerning Christ---namely, that God dwelt in Him by grace, not of adoption, but of union: and that His supernatural doctrine was from God. And therefore it was most fitting that He should work miracles. Wherefore He Himself says (
Jn. 10:38
): "Though you will not believe Me, believe the works"; and (
Jn. 5:36
): "The works which the Father hath given Me to perfect... themselves... give testimony to Me."




Ad primum ergo dicendum quod hoc quod dicit, signum non dabitur ei nisi signum Ionae, sic intelligendum est, ut Chrysostomus dicit, quod tunc non acceperunt tale signum quale petebant, scilicet de caelo, non quod nullum signum eis dederit. Vel, quia signa faciebat, non propter eos, quos sciebat lapideos esse, sed ut alios emundaret. Et ideo non eis, sed aliis illa signa dabantur.
        
Reply to Objection 1:
 These words, "a sign shall not be given it, but the sign of Jonas," mean, as Chrysostom says (Hom. xliii in Matth.), that "they did not receive a sign such as they sought, viz. from heaven": but not that He gave them no sign at all. Or that "He worked signs not for the sake of those whom He knew to be hardened, but to amend others." Therefore those signs were given, not to them, but to others.




Ad secundum dicendum quod, licet Christus venerit in infirmitate carnis, quod manifestatur per passiones, venit tamen in virtute Dei. Quod erat manifestandum per miracula.
        
Reply to Objection 2:
 Although Christ came "in the infirmity" of the flesh, which is manifested in the passions, yet He came "in the power of God" [*Cf. 2 Cor. 13:4], and this had to be made manifest by miracles.




Ad tertium dicendum quod miracula intantum diminuunt meritum fidei, inquantum per hoc ostenditur duritia eorum qui nolunt credere ea quae Scripturis divinis probantur, nisi per miracula. Et tamen melius est eis ut vel per miracula convertantur ad fidem quam quod omnino in infidelitate permaneant. Dicitur enim I Cor. XIV, quod signa data sunt infidelibus, ut scilicet convertantur ad fidem.
        
Reply to Objection 3:
 Miracles lessen the merit of faith in so far as those are shown to be hard of heart who are unwilling to believe what is proved from the Scriptures unless (they are convinced) by miracles. Yet it is better for them to be converted to the faith even by miracles than that they should remain altogether in their unbelief. For it is written (1 Cor. 14:22) that signs are given "to unbelievers," viz. that they may be converted to the faith.