# Summa Theologica

Quarto, de tempore quo iacuit in sepulcro.
        


(4)
 Concerning the length of time He lay in the tomb.

Ad tertium dicendum quod Christus de sepulcro resurrexit virtute divina, quae nullis terminis coarctatur. Et ideo hoc quod a sepulcro surrexit, sufficiens argumentum fuit quod homines erant resuscitandi virtute divina non solum de sepulcris, sed etiam de quibuscumque cineribus.
        
Reply to Objection 3:
 Christ rose from the tomb by Divine power, which is not narrowed within bounds. Consequently, His rising from the grave was a sufficient argument to prove that men are to be raised up by Divine power, not only from their graves, but also from any dust whatever.

Ad secundum dicendum quod, sicut Augustinus dicit, in IV de Trin., Christus in diluculo resurrexit, in quo aliquid lucis apparet, et adhuc tamen aliquid remanet tenebrarum noctis, unde de mulieribus dicitur, Ioan. XX, quod cum tenebrae adhuc essent, venerunt ad monumentum. Ratione ergo harum tenebrarum, Gregorius dicit Christum media nocte surrexisse, non quidem divisa nocte in duas partes aequales, sed infra illam noctem. Illud enim diluculum et pars noctis et pars diei dici potest, propter communicantiam quam habet cum utroque.
        


Reply to Objection 2:
 As Augustine says (De Trin. iv; cf. De Consens. Evang. iii), Christ rose with the dawn, when light appears in part, and still some part of the darkness of the night remains. Hence it is said of the women that "when it was yet dark" they came "to the sepulchre" (
Jn. 20:1
). Therefore, in consequence of this darkness, Gregory says (Hom. xxi) that Christ rose in the middle of the night, not that night is divided into two equal parts, but during the night itself: for the expression "early" can be taken as partly night and partly day, from its fittingness with both.




Ad tertium dicendum quod in tantum lux in morte Christi praevaluit, quod significatur per unam diem, quod tenebras duarum noctium, idest duplicis mortis nostrae, removit, ut dictum est.
        
Reply to Objection 3:
 The light prevailed so far in Christ's death (which is denoted by the one day) that it dispelled the darkness of the two nights, that is, of our twofold death, as stated above.