# Summa Theologica

Ad secundum dicendum quod, quamvis de natura corporis non sit quod possit esse in eodem loco cum alio corpore, tamen potest hoc Deus facere per miraculum quod in eodem loco possint esse, sicut et fecit corpus Christi ut de clauso utero beatae virginis exiret, et quod intravit ianuis clausis, sicut dicit beatus Gregorius. Corpori ergo Christi convenire potest esse cum alio corpore in eodem loco, non ex proprietate corporis, sed per virtutem divinam assistentem et hoc operantem.
        
Reply to Objection 3:
 Although it is not of the nature of a body for it to be in the same place with another body, yet God can bring it about miraculously that a body be with another in the same place, as Christ did when He went forth from the Virgin's sealed womb, also when He entered among the disciples through closed doors, as Gregory says (Hom. xxvi). Therefore Christ's body can be in the same place with another body, not through some inherent property in the body, but through the assistance and operation of the Divine power.




Ad tertium dicendum quod nubes illa non praebuit adminiculum Christo ascendenti per modum vehiculi, sed apparuit in signum divinitatis, secundum quod gloria Dei Israel apparebat super tabernaculum in nube.
        


Reply to Objection 4:
 That cloud afforded no support as a vehicle to the ascending Christ: but it appeared as a sign of the Godhead, just as God's glory appeared to Israel in a cloud over the Tabernacle (
Ex. 40:32; Num. 9:15
).
      


Ad quartum dicendum quod corpus gloriosum non habet ex principiis suae naturae quod possit in caelo aut supra caelum esse, sed habet hoc ex anima beata, ex qua recipit gloriam. Et sicut motus gloriosi corporis sursum non est violentus, ita nec quies violenta. Unde nihil prohibet eam esse sempiternam.
        
Reply to Objection 5:
 A glorified body has the power to be in heaven or above heaven. not from its natural principles, but from the beatified soul, from which it derives its glory: and just as the upward motion of a glorified body is not violent, so neither is its rest violent: consequently, there is nothing to prevent it from being everlasting.