# Summa Theologica

Deinde considerandum est de obiecto caritatis. Circa quod duo consideranda occurrunt,
          


primo quidem de his quae sunt ex caritate diligenda;
            
secundo, de ordine diligendorum.
          



          We must now consider the object of charity; which consideration will be twofold:
          


(1) The things we ought to love out of charity:
            
(2) The order in which they ought to be loved.
          




Circa primum quaeruntur duodecim.
        
Under the first head there are twelve points of inquiry:




Primo, utrum solus Deus sit ex caritate diligendus, vel etiam proximus.
        


(1)
 Whether we should love God alone, out of charity, or should we love our neighbor also?




Secundo, utrum caritas sit ex caritate diligenda.
        


(2)
 Whether charity should be loved out of charity?
      


Tertio, utrum creaturae irrationales sint ex caritate diligendae.
        


(3)
 Whether irrational creatures ought to be loved out of charity?
      


Quarto, utrum aliquis possit ex caritate seipsum diligere.
        


(4)
 Whether one may love oneself out of charity?
      


Quinto, utrum corpus proprium.
        


(5)
 Whether one's own body?
      


Sexto, utrum peccatores sint ex caritate diligendi.
        


(6)
 Whether sinners should be loved out of charity?
      


Septimo, utrum peccatores seipsos diligant.
        


(7)
 Whether sinners love themselves?
      


Octavo, utrum inimici sint ex caritate diligendi.
        


(8)
 Whether we should love our enemies out of charity?
      


Nono, utrum sint eis signa amicitiae exhibenda.
        


(9)
 Whether we are bound to show them tokens of friendship?
      


Decimo, utrum Angeli sint ex caritate diligendi.
        


(10)
 Whether we ought to love the angels out of charity?
      


Undecimo, utrum Daemones.
        


(11)
 Whether we ought to love the demons?
      


Duodecimo, de enumeratione diligendorum ex caritate.
        


(12)
 How to enumerate the things we are bound to love out of charity.

Ad primum ergo dicendum quod Deus et proximus sunt illi ad quos amicitiam habemus. Sed in illorum dilectione includitur dilectio caritatis, diligimus enim proximum et Deum inquantum hoc amamus, ut nos et proximus Deum diligamus, quod est caritatem habere.
        
Reply to Objection 1:
 God and our neighbor are those with whom we are friends, but love of them includes the loving of charity, since we love both God and our neighbor, in so far as we love ourselves and our neighbor to love God, and this is to love charity.




Ad secundum dicendum quod caritas est ipsa communicatio spiritualis vitae, per quam ad beatitudinem pervenitur. Et ideo amatur sicut bonum desideratum omnibus quos ex caritate diligimus.
        
Reply to Objection 2:
 Charity is itself the fellowship of the spiritual life, whereby we arrive at happiness: hence it is loved as the good which we desire for all whom we love out of charity.




Ad tertium dicendum quod ratio illa procedit secundum quod per amicitiam amantur illi ad quos amicitiam habemus.
        
Reply to Objection 3:
 This argument considers friendship as referred to those with whom we are friends.

Ad tertium dicendum quod ratio illa procedit secundum quod per amicitiam amantur illi ad quos amicitiam habemus.
        
Reply to Objection 3:
 This argument considers friendship as referred to those with whom we are friends.

Ad tertium dicendum quod mali, inquantum aestimant se bonos, sic aliquid participant de amore sui. Nec tamen ista est vera sui dilectio, sed apparens. Quae etiam non est possibilis in his qui valde sunt mali.
        
Reply to Objection 3:
 The wicked have some share of self-love, in so far as they think themselves good. Yet such love of self is not true but apparent: and even this is not possible in those who are very wicked.

Ad tertium dicendum quod diligere inimicos inquantum sunt inimici, hoc est vituperabile. Et hoc non facit caritas, ut dictum est.
        
Reply to Objection 3:
 It is wrong to love one's enemies as such: charity does not do this, as stated above.

Et per hoc patet responsio ad obiecta.
        
This suffices for the Replies to the Objections.

Ad primum ergo dicendum quod mens Angelorum non habet impossibilitatem ad aeternam beatitudinem habendam, sicut habet mens Daemonum. Et ideo amicitia caritatis, quae fundatur super communicatione vitae aeternae magis quam super communicatione naturae, habetur ad Angelos, non autem ad Daemones.
        
Reply to Objection 1:
 The possession of everlasting happiness is not impossible for the angelic mind as it is for the mind of a demon; consequently the friendship of charity which is based on the fellowship of everlasting life, rather than on the fellowship of nature, is possible towards the angels, but not towards the demons.




Ad secundum dicendum quod homines peccatores in hac vita habent possibilitatem perveniendi ad beatitudinem aeternam. Quod non habent illi qui sunt in Inferno damnati; de quibus, quantum ad hoc, est eadem ratio sicut et de Daemonibus.
        
Reply to Objection 2:
 In this life, men who are in sin retain the possibility of obtaining everlasting happiness: not so those who are lost in hell, who, in this respect, are in the same case as the demons.




Ad tertium dicendum quod utilitas quae nobis ex Daemonibus provenit non est ex eorum intentione, sed ex ordinatione divinae providentiae. Et ideo ex hoc non inducimur ad habendum amicitiam eorum, sed ad hoc quod simus Deo amici, qui eorum perversam intentionem convertit in nostram utilitatem.
        
Reply to Objection 3:
 That the demons are useful to us is due not to their intention but to the ordering of Divine providence; hence this leads us to be friends, not with them, but with God, Who turns their perverse intention to our profit.

Ad secundum dicendum quod homines peccatores in hac vita habent possibilitatem perveniendi ad beatitudinem aeternam. Quod non habent illi qui sunt in Inferno damnati; de quibus, quantum ad hoc, est eadem ratio sicut et de Daemonibus.
        
Reply to Objection 2:
 In this life, men who are in sin retain the possibility of obtaining everlasting happiness: not so those who are lost in hell, who, in this respect, are in the same case as the demons.




Ad tertium dicendum quod utilitas quae nobis ex Daemonibus provenit non est ex eorum intentione, sed ex ordinatione divinae providentiae. Et ideo ex hoc non inducimur ad habendum amicitiam eorum, sed ad hoc quod simus Deo amici, qui eorum perversam intentionem convertit in nostram utilitatem.
        
Reply to Objection 3:
 That the demons are useful to us is due not to their intention but to the ordering of Divine providence; hence this leads us to be friends, not with them, but with God, Who turns their perverse intention to our profit.

Ad tertium dicendum quod utilitas quae nobis ex Daemonibus provenit non est ex eorum intentione, sed ex ordinatione divinae providentiae. Et ideo ex hoc non inducimur ad habendum amicitiam eorum, sed ad hoc quod simus Deo amici, qui eorum perversam intentionem convertit in nostram utilitatem.
        
Reply to Objection 3:
 That the demons are useful to us is due not to their intention but to the ordering of Divine providence; hence this leads us to be friends, not with them, but with God, Who turns their perverse intention to our profit.

Ad duodecimum sic proceditur. Videtur quod inconvenienter enumerentur quatuor ex caritate diligenda, scilicet Deus, proximus, corpus nostrum et nos ipsi. Ut enim Augustinus dicit, super Ioan., qui non diligit Deum, nec seipsum diligit. In Dei ergo dilectione includitur dilectio sui ipsius. Non ergo est alia dilectio sui ipsius, et alia dilectio Dei.
        
Objection 1:
 It would seem that these four things are not rightly reckoned as to be loved out of charity, to wit: God, our neighbor, our body, and ourselves. For, as Augustine states (Tract. super Joan. lxxxiii), "he that loveth not God, loveth not himself." Hence love of oneself is included in the love of God. Therefore love of oneself is not distinct from the love of God.




Praeterea, pars non debet dividi contra totum. Sed corpus nostrum est quaedam pars nostri. Non ergo debet dividi, quasi aliud diligibile, corpus nostrum a nobis ipsis.
        
Objection 2:
 Further, a part ought not to be condivided with the whole. But our body is part of ourselves. Therefore it ought not to be condivided with ourselves as a distinct object of love.




Praeterea, sicut nos habemus corpus, ita etiam et proximus. Sicut ergo dilectio qua quis diligit proximum, distinguitur a dilectione qua quis diligit seipsum; ita dilectio qua quis diligit corpus proximi, debet distingui a dilectione qua quis diligit corpus suum. Non ergo convenienter distinguuntur quatuor ex caritate diligenda.
        
Objection 3:
 Further, just as a man has a body, so has his neighbor. Since then the love with which a man loves his neighbor, is distinct from the love with which a man loves himself, so the love with which a man loves his neighbor's body, ought to be distinct from the love with which he loves his own body. Therefore these four things are not rightly distinguished as objects to be loved out of charity.




Sed contra est quod Augustinus dicit, in I de Doct. Christ., quatuor sunt diligenda, unum quod supra nos est, scilicet Deus; alterum quod nos sumus; tertium quod iuxta nos est, scilicet proximus; quartum quod infra nos est, scilicet proprium corpus.
        
On the contrary,
 Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. i, 23): "There are four things to be loved; one which is above us," namely God, "another, which is ourselves, a third which is nigh to us," namely our neighbor, "and a fourth which is beneath us," namely our own body.




Respondeo dicendum quod, sicut dictum est, amicitia caritatis super communicatione beatitudinis fundatur. In qua quidem communicatione unum quidem est quod consideratur ut principium influens beatitudinem, scilicet Deus; aliud est beatitudinem directe participans, scilicet homo et Angelus; tertium autem est id ad quod per quandam redundantiam beatitudo derivatur, scilicet corpus humanum.
        


I answer that,
 As stated above (
Question [23]
, 
Articles [1]
,5), the friendship of charity is based on the fellowship of happiness. Now, in this fellowship, one thing is considered as the principle from which happiness flows, namely God; a second is that which directly partakes of happiness, namely men and angels; a third is a thing to which happiness comes by a kind of overflow, namely the human body.




Id quidem quod est beatitudinem influens est ea ratione diligibile quia est beatitudinis causa. Id autem quod est beatitudinem participans potest esse duplici ratione diligibile, vel quia est unum nobiscum; vel quia est nobis consociatum in beatitudinis participatione. Et secundum hoc sumuntur duo ex caritate diligibilia, prout scilicet homo diligit et seipsum et proximum.
        
Now the source from which happiness flows is lovable by reason of its being the cause of happiness: that which is a partaker of happiness, can be an object of love for two reasons, either through being identified with ourselves, or through being associated with us in partaking of happiness, and in this respect, there are two things to be loved out of charity, in as much as man loves both himself and his neighbor.




Ad primum ergo dicendum quod diversa habitudo diligentis ad diversa diligibilia facit diversam rationem diligibilitatis. Et secundum hoc, quia alia est habitudo hominis diligentis ad Deum et ad seipsum, propter hoc ponuntur duo diligibilia, cum dilectio unius sit causa dilectionis alterius. Unde, ea remota, alia removetur.
        
Reply to Objection 1:
 The different relations between a lover and the various things loved make a different kind of lovableness. Accordingly, since the relation between the human lover and God is different from his relation to himself, these two are reckoned as distinct objects of love, for the love of the one is the cause of the love of the other, so that the former love being removed the latter is taken away.




Ad secundum dicendum quod subiectum caritatis est mens rationalis quae potest beatitudinis esse capax, ad quam corpus directe non attingit, sed solum per quandam redundantiam. Et ideo homo secundum rationalem mentem, quae est principalis in homine, alio modo se diligit secundum caritatem, et alio modo corpus proprium.
        
Reply to Objection 2:
 The subject of charity is the rational mind that can be capable of obtaining happiness, to which the body does not reach directly, but only by a kind of overflow. Hence, by his reasonable mind which holds the first place in him, man, out of charity, loves himself in one way, and his own body in another.




Ad tertium dicendum quod homo diligit proximum et secundum animam et secundum corpus ratione cuiusdam consociationis in beatitudine. Et ideo ex parte proximi est una tantum ratio dilectionis. Unde corpus proximi non ponitur speciale diligibile.
        
Reply to Objection 3:
 Man loves his neighbor, both as to his soul and as to his body, by reason of a certain fellowship in happiness. Wherefore, on the part of his neighbor, there is only one reason for loving him; and our neighbor's body is not reckoned as a special object of love.