# Summa Theologica

Respondeo dicendum quod gravitas peccati dupliciter potest considerari, uno modo, secundum suam speciem; alio modo, secundum circumstantias. Et quia circumstantiae particulares sunt et infinitis modis variari possunt, cum quaeritur in communi de duobus peccatis quod sit gravius, intelligenda est quaestio de gravitate quae attenditur secundum genus peccati. Genus autem seu species peccati attenditur ex obiecto; sicut ex supradictis patet. Et ideo illud peccatum quod maiori bono contrariatur est ex suo genere gravius, sicut peccatum in Deum quam peccatum in proximum.
        


I answer that,
 The gravity of a sin can be considered in two ways: first, according to the species of that sin, secondly, according to its circumstances. And since particular circumstances are infinite in number, so too they can be varied in an infinite number of ways: wherefore if one were to ask in general which of two sins is the graver, the question must be understood to refer to the gravity derived from the sin's genus. Now the genus or species of a sin is taken from its object, as shown above (
FS
, 
Question [72]
, 
Article [1]
; 
FS
, 
Question [73]
, 
Article [3]
). Wherefore the sin which is opposed to the greater good is, in respect of its genus, more grievous, for instance a sin committed against God is graver than a sin committed against one's neighbor.




Manifestum est autem quod infidelitas est peccatum contra ipsum Deum, secundum quod in se est veritas prima, cui fides innititur. Schisma autem est contra ecclesiasticam unitatem, quae est quoddam bonum participatum, et minus quam sit ipse Deus. Unde manifestum est quod peccatum infidelitatis ex suo genere est gravius quam peccatum schismatis, licet possit contingere quod aliquis schismaticus gravius peccet quam quidam infidelis, vel propter maiorem contemptum, vel propter maius periculum quod inducit, vel propter aliquid huiusmodi.
        
Now it is evident that unbelief is a sin committed against God Himself, according as He is Himself the First Truth, on which faith is founded; whereas schism is opposed to ecclesiastical unity, which is a participated good, and a lesser good than God Himself. Wherefore it is manifest that the sin of unbelief is generically more grievous than the sin of schism, although it may happen that a particular schismatic sins more grievously than a particular unbeliever, either because his contempt is greater, or because his sin is a source of greater danger, or for some similar reason.




Ad primum ergo dicendum quod populo illi manifestum erat iam per legem susceptam quod erat unus Deus et quod non erant alii dii colendi, et hoc erat apud eos per multiplicia signa confirmatum. Et ideo non oportebat quod peccantes contra hanc fidem per idololatriam punirentur inusitata aliqua et insolita poena, sed solum communi. Sed non erat sic notum apud eos quod Moyses deberet esse semper eorum princeps. Et ideo rebellantes eius principatui oportebat miraculosa et insueta poena puniri.
        
Reply to Objection 1:
 It had already been declared to that people by the law which they had received that there was one God, and that no other God was to be worshipped by them; and the same had been confirmed among them by many kinds of signs. Consequently there was no need for those who sinned against this faith by falling into idolatry, to be punished in an unwonted manner: it was enough that they should be punished in the usual way. On the other hand, it was not so well known among them that Moses was always to be their ruler, and so it behooved those who rebelled against his authority to be punished in a miraculous and unwonted manner.




Vel potest dici quod peccatum schismatis quandoque gravius est punitum in populo illo quia erat ad seditiones et schismata promptus, dicitur enim I Esdr. IV, civitas illa a diebus antiquis adversus regem rebellat, et seditiones et praelia concitantur in ea. Poena autem maior quandoque infligitur pro peccato magis consueto, ut supra habitum est, nam poenae sunt medicinae quaedam ad arcendum homines a peccato; unde ubi est maior pronitas ad peccandum, debet severior poena adhiberi. Decem autem tribus non solum fuerunt punitae pro peccato schismatis, sed etiam pro peccato idololatriae, ut ibidem dicitur.
        
We may also reply by saying that the sin of schism was sometimes more severely punished in that people, because they were inclined to seditions and schisms. For it is written (1 Esdra 4:15): "This city since days gone by has rebelled against its kings: and seditions and wars were raised therein [*Vulg.: 'This city is a rebellious city, and hurtful to the kings and provinces, and... wars were raised therein of old']." Now sometimes a more severe punishment is inflicted for an habitual sin (as stated above, FS, Question [105], Article [2], ad 9), because punishments are medicines intended to keep man away from sin: so that where there is greater proneness to sin, a more severe punishment ought to be inflicted. As regards the ten tribes, they were punished not only for the sin of schism, but also for that of idolatry as stated in the passage quoted.




Ad secundum dicendum quod sicut bonum multitudinis est maius quam bonum unius qui est de multitudine, ita est minus quam bonum extrinsecum ad quod multitudo ordinatur, sicut bonum ordinis exercitus est minus quam bonum ducis. Et similiter bonum ecclesiasticae unitatis, cui opponitur schisma, est minus quam bonum veritatis divinae, cui opponitur infidelitas.
        
Reply to Objection 2:
 Just as the good of the multitude is greater than the good of a unit in that multitude, so is it less than the extrinsic good to which that multitude is directed, even as the good of a rank in the army is less than the good of the commander-in-chief. In like manner the good of ecclesiastical unity, to which schism is opposed, is less than the good of Divine truth, to which unbelief is opposed.




Ad tertium dicendum quod caritas habet duo obiecta, unum principale, scilicet bonitatem divinam; et aliud secundarium, scilicet bonum proximi. Schisma autem et alia peccata quae fiunt in proximum opponuntur caritati quantum ad secundarium bonum, quod est minus quam obiectum fidei, quod est ipse Deus. Et ideo ista peccata sunt minora quam infidelitas. Sed odium Dei, quod opponitur caritati quantum ad principale obiectum, non est minus. Tamen inter peccata quae sunt in proximum, peccatum schismatis videtur esse maximum, quia est contra spirituale bonum multitudinis.
        
Reply to Objection 3:
 Charity has two objects; one is its principal object and is the Divine goodness, the other is its secondary object and is our neighbor's good. Now schism and other sins against our neighbor, are opposed to charity in respect of its secondary good, which is less than the object of faith, for this is God Himself; and so these sins are less grievous than unbelief. On the other hand, hatred of God, which is opposed to charity in respect of its principal object, is not less grievous than unbelief. Nevertheless of all sins committed by man against his neighbor, the sin of schism would seem to be the greatest, because it is opposed to the spiritual good of the multitude.

Ad secundum dicendum quod per excommunicationem non interdicitur illa communicatio per quam aliquis salubribus monitis divisos reducit ad Ecclesiae unitatem. Tamen et ipsa separatio quodammodo eos reducit, dum, de sua separatione confusi, quandoque ad poenitentiam adducuntur.
        
Reply to Objection 2:
 Excommunication does not forbid the intercourse whereby a person by salutary admonitions leads back to the unity of the Church those who are separated from her. Indeed this very separation brings them back somewhat, because through confusion at their separation, they are sometimes led to do penance
      


Ad tertium dicendum quod poenae praesentis vitae sunt medicinales; et ideo quando una poena non sufficit ad coercendum hominem, superadditur altera, sicut et medici diversas medicinas corporales apponunt quando una non est efficax et ita Ecclesia, quando aliqui per excommunicationem non sufficienter reprimuntur, adhibet coercionem brachii saecularis. Sed si una poena sit sufficiens, non debet alia adhiberi.
        
Reply to Objection 3:
 The punishments of the present life are medicinal, and therefore when one punishment does not suffice to compel a man, another is added: just as physicians employ several body medicines when one has no effect. In like manner the Church, when excommunication does not sufficiently restrain certain men, employs the compulsion of the secular arm. If, however, one punishment suffices, another should not be employed.

Ad tertium dicendum quod poenae praesentis vitae sunt medicinales; et ideo quando una poena non sufficit ad coercendum hominem, superadditur altera, sicut et medici diversas medicinas corporales apponunt quando una non est efficax et ita Ecclesia, quando aliqui per excommunicationem non sufficienter reprimuntur, adhibet coercionem brachii saecularis. Sed si una poena sit sufficiens, non debet alia adhiberi.
        
Reply to Objection 3:
 The punishments of the present life are medicinal, and therefore when one punishment does not suffice to compel a man, another is added: just as physicians employ several body medicines when one has no effect. In like manner the Church, when excommunication does not sufficiently restrain certain men, employs the compulsion of the secular arm. If, however, one punishment suffices, another should not be employed.