# Summa Theologica

Ad primum ergo dicendum quod in humanis actibus invenitur aliqua certitudo, non quidem sicut in demonstrativis, sed secundum quod convenit tali materiae, puta cum aliquid per idoneos testes probatur.
        
Reply to Objection 1:
 Some kind of certainty is found in human acts, not indeed the certainty of a demonstration, but such as is befitting the matter in point, for instance when a thing is proved by suitable witnesses.




Ad secundum dicendum quod ex hoc ipso quod aliquis malam opinionem habet de alio sine causa sufficienti, indebite contemnit ipsum. Et ideo iniuriatur ei.
        
Reply to Objection 2:
 From the very fact that a man thinks evil of another without sufficient cause, he despises him unduly, and therefore does him an injury.




Ad tertium dicendum quod quia iustitia et iniustitia est circa exteriores operationes, ut dictum est, tunc iudicium suspiciosum directe ad iniustitiam pertinet quando ad actum exteriorem procedit. Et tunc est peccatum mortale, ut dictum est. Iudicium autem interius pertinet ad iustitiam secundum quod comparatur ad exterius iudicium ut actus interior ad exteriorem, sicut concupiscentia ad fornicationem, et ira ad homicidium.
        


Reply to Objection 3:
 Since justice and injustice are about external operations, as stated above (
Question [58]
, 
Articles [8]
,10,11; 
Question [59]
, 
Article [1]
, ad 3), the judgment of suspicion pertains directly to injustice when it is betrayed by external action, and then it is a mortal sin, as stated above. The internal judgment pertains to justice, in so far as it is related to the external judgment, even as the internal to the external act, for instance as desire is related to fornication, or anger to murder.

Ad quartum dicendum quod habitus scientiae et iustitiae sunt perfectiones singularis personae, et ideo per eorum defectum non dicitur usurpatum iudicium, sicut per defectum publicae auctoritatis, ex qua iudicium vim coactivam habet.
        
Reply to Objection 4:
 The habits of knowledge and justice are perfections of the individual, and consequently their absence does not make a judgment to be usurped, as in the absence of public authority which gives a judgment its coercive force.