# Summa Theologica

Ad quartum dicendum quod, sicut philosophus dicit, in VI Ethic., oportet artis esse quandam virtutem, scilicet moralem, per quam scilicet appetitus inclinetur ad recte utendum ratione artis. Et hoc pertinet ad magnificentiam. Unde non est ars, sed virtus.
        
Reply to Objection 4:
 As the Philosopher says (Ethic. vi, 5) "there must needs be a virtue of act," i.e. a moral virtue, whereby the appetite is inclined to make good use of the rule of act: and this is what magnificence does. Hence it is not an act but a virtue.

Praeterea, philosophus dicit, in IV Ethic., quod magnificus scienti assimilatur. Sed scientia magis convenit cum prudentia quam cum fortitudine. Ergo magnificentia non debet poni pars fortitudinis.
        
Objection 3:
 Further, the Philosopher says (Ethic. iv, 2) that "the magnificent man is like the man of science." Now science has more in common with prudence than with fortitude. Therefore magnificence should not be reckoned a part of fortitude.




Sed contra est quod Tullius et Macrobius et Andronicus magnificentiam partem fortitudinis ponunt.
        
On the contrary,
 Tully (De Invent. Rhet. ii) and Macrobius (De Somn. Scip. i) and Andronicus reckon magnificence to be a part of fortitude.




Respondeo dicendum quod magnificentia, secundum quod est specialis virtus, non potest poni pars subiectiva fortitudinis, quia non convenit cum ea in materia, sed ponitur pars eius inquantum adiungitur ei sicut virtus secundaria principali.
        
I answer that,
 Magnificence, in so far as it is a special virtue, cannot be reckoned a subjective part of fortitude, since it does not agree with this virtue in the point of matter: but it is reckoned a part thereof, as being annexed to it as secondary to principal virtue.




Ad hoc autem quod aliqua virtus adiungatur alicui principali, duo requiruntur, ut supra dictum est, quorum unum est ut secundaria conveniat cum principali; aliud autem est ut in aliquo excedatur ab ea. Magnificentia autem convenit cum fortitudine in hoc quod, sicut fortitudo tendit in aliquod arduum et difficile, ita etiam et magnificentia, unde etiam videtur esse in irascibili, sicut et fortitudo. Sed magnificentia deficit a fortitudine in hoc quod illud arduum in quod tendit fortitudo, habet difficultatem propter periculum quod imminet personae, arduum autem in quod tendit magnificentia, habet difficultatem propter dispendium rerum; quod est multo minus quam periculum personae. Et ideo magnificentia ponitur pars fortitudinis.
        

          In order for a virtue to be annexed to a principal virtue, two things are necessary, as stated above (
Question [80]
). The one is that the secondary virtue agree with the principal, and the other is that in some respect it be exceeded thereby. Now magnificence agrees with fortitude in the point that as fortitude tends to something arduous and difficult, so also does magnificence: wherefore seemingly it is seated, like fortitude, in the irascible. Yet magnificence falls short of fortitude, in that the arduous thing to which fortitude tends derives its difficulty from a danger that threatens the person, whereas the arduous thing to which magnificence tends, derives its difficulty from the dispossession of one's property, which is of much less account than danger to one's person. Wherefore magnificence is accounted a part of fortitude.




Ad primum ergo dicendum quod iustitia respicit operationes secundum se, prout in eis consideratur ratio debiti. Sed liberalitas et magnificentia considerant operationes sumptuum secundum quod comparantur ad passiones animae, diversimode tamen. Nam liberalitas respicit sumptus per comparationem ad amorem et concupiscentiam pecuniarum, quae sunt passiones concupiscibilis, quibus non impeditur liberalis a dationibus et sumptibus faciendis, unde est in concupiscibili. Sed magnificentia respicit sumptus per comparationem ad spem, attingendo ad aliquid arduum, non simpliciter, sicut magnanimitas, sed in determinata materia, scilicet in sumptibus. Unde magnificentia videtur esse in irascibili, sicut et magnanimitas.
        
Reply to Objection 1:
 Justice regards operations in themselves, as viewed under the aspect of something due: but liberality and magnificence regard sumptuary operations as related to the passions of the soul, albeit in different ways. For liberality regards expenditure in reference to the love and desire of money, which are passions of the concupiscible faculty, and do not hinder the liberal man from giving and spending: so that this virtue is in the concupiscible. On the other hand, magnificence regards expenditure in reference to hope, by attaining to the difficulty, not simply, as magnanimity does, but in a determinate matter, namely expenditure: wherefore magnificence, like magnanimity, is apparently in the irascible part.




Ad secundum dicendum quod magnificentia, etsi non conveniat cum fortitudine in materia, convenit tamen cum ea in conditione materiae, inquantum scilicet tendit in aliquid arduum circa sumptus, sicut fortitudo in aliquid arduum circa timores.
        
Reply to Objection 2:
 Although magnificence does not agree with fortitude in matter, it agrees with it as the condition of its matter: since it tends to something difficult in the matter of expenditure, even as fortitude tends to something difficult in the matter of fear.




Ad tertium dicendum quod magnificentia ordinat usum artis ad aliquid magnum, ut dictum est. Ars autem est in ratione. Et ideo ad magnificum pertinet bene uti ratione in attendendo proportionem sumptus ad opus quod faciendum est. Et hoc praecipue necessarium est propter magnitudinem utriusque, quia nisi diligens consideratio adhiberetur, immineret periculum magni damni.
        
Reply to Objection 3:
 Magnificence directs the use of art to something great, as stated above and in the preceding Article. Now art is in the reason. Wherefore it belongs to the magnificent man to use his reason by observing proportion of expenditure to the work he has in hand. This is especially necessary on account of the greatness of both those things, since if he did not take careful thought, he would incur the risk of a great loss.