# Summa Theologica

Ratio autem numeri, quantum ad quadragesimale ieiunium, est triplex, secundum Gregorium. Prima quidem, quia virtus Decalogi per libros quatuor sancti Evangelii impletur, denarius autem quater ductus in quadragenarium surgit. Vel quia in hoc mortali corpore ex quatuor elementis subsistimus, per cuius voluntatem praeceptis dominicis contraimus, quae per Decalogum sunt accepta. Unde dignum est ut eandem carnem quaterdecies affligamus. Vel quia ita offerre contendimus Deo decimas dierum. Dum enim per trecentos et sexaginta dies annus ducitur, nos autem per triginta sex dies affligimur, qui sunt ieiunabiles in sex septimanis Quadragesimae, quasi anni nostri decimas Deo damus. Secundum autem Augustinum, additur quarta ratio. Nam creator est Trinitas, pater et filius et spiritus sanctus. Creaturae vero invisibili debetur ternarius numerus, diligere enim iubemur Deum ex toto corde, ex tota anima, ex tota mente. Creaturae vero visibili debetur quaternarius, propter calidum et frigidum, humidum et siccum. Sic ergo per denarium significantur omnes res, qui si ducatur per quaternarium, qui competit corpori, per quod administratio geritur, quadragesimum numerum conficit.
        
With regard to the forty day's fast, according to Gregory (Hom. xvi in Evang.) there are three reasons for the number. First, "because the power of the Decalogue is accomplished in the four books of the Holy Gospels: since forty is the product of ten multiplied by four." Or "because we are composed of four elements in this mortal body through whose lusts we transgress the Lord's commandments which are delivered to us in the Decalogue. Wherefore it is fitting we should punish that same body forty times. or, because, just as under the Law it was commanded that tithes should be paid of things, so we strive to pay God a tithe of days, for since a year is composed of three hundred and sixty-six days, by punishing ourselves for thirty-six days" (namely, the fasting days during the six weeks of Lent) "we pay God a tithe of our year." According to Augustine (De Doctr. Christ. ii, 16) a fourth reason may be added. For the Creator is the "Trinity," Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: while the number "three" refers to the invisible creature, since we are commanded to love God, with our whole heart, with our whole soul, and with our whole mind: and the number "four" refers to the visible creature, by reason of heat, cold, wet and dry. Thus the number "ten" [*Ten is the sum of three, three, and four] signifies all things, and if this be multiplied by four which refers to the body whereby we make use of things, we have the number forty.




Singula vero ieiunia quatuor temporum tribus diebus continentur, propter numerum mensium qui competit cuilibet tempori. Vel propter numerum sacrorum ordinum, qui in his temporibus conferuntur.
        
Each fast of the Ember days is composed of three days, on account of the number of months in each season: or on account of the number of Holy orders which are conferred at these times.




Ad primum ergo dicendum quod Christus Baptismo non indiguit propter seipsum, sed ut nobis Baptismum commendaret. Et ideo sibi non competebat ut ante Baptismum suum ieiunaret, sed post Baptismum, ut nos invitaret ad ieiunandum ante nostrum Baptismum.
        
Reply to Objection 1:
 Christ needed not baptism for His own sake, but in order to commend baptism to us. Wherefore it was competent for Him to fast, not before, but after His baptism, in order to invite us to fast before our baptism.




Ad secundum dicendum quod Ecclesia non servat ieiunia quatuor temporum nec omnino eisdem temporibus quibus Iudaei, nec etiam propter causas easdem. Illi enim ieiunabant in Iulio, qui est quartus mensis ab Aprili, quem primum habent, quia tunc Moyses, descendens de monte Sina, tabulas legis confregit; et iuxta Ieremiam, muri primum rupti sunt civitatis. In quinto autem mense, qui apud nos vocatur Augustus, cum propter exploratores seditio esset orta in populo, iussi sunt in montem non ascendere, et in hoc mense a Nabuchodonosor, et post a Tito, templum Hierosolymis est incensum. In septimo vero, qui appellatur October, Godolias occisus est, et reliquiae populi dissipatae. In decimo vero mense, qui apud nos Ianuarius dicitur, populus cum Ezechiele in captivitate positus, audivit templum esse subversum.
        


Reply to Objection 2:
 The Church keeps the Ember fasts, neither at the very same time as the Jews, nor for the same reasons. For they fasted in July, which is the fourth month from April (which they count as the first), because it was then that Moses coming down from Mount Sinai broke the tables of the Law (
Ex. 32
), and that, according to Jer. 39%3A2, "the walls of the city were first broken through." In the fifth month, which we call August, they fasted because they were commanded not to go up on to the mountain, when the people had rebelled on account of the spies (
Num. 14
): also in this month the temple of Jerusalem was burnt down by Nabuchodonosor (
Jer. 52
) and afterwards by Titus. In the seventh month which we call October, Godolias was slain, and the remnants of the people were dispersed (
Jer. 51
). In the tenth month, which we call January, the people who were with Ezechiel in captivity heard of the destruction of the temple (Ezech. 4).




Ad tertium dicendum quod ieiunium exultationis ex instinctu spiritus sancti procedit, qui est spiritus libertatis. Et ideo hoc ieiunium sub praecepto cadere non debet. Ieiunia ergo quae praecepto Ecclesiae instituuntur, sunt magis ieiunia afflictionis, quae non conveniunt in diebus laetitiae. Propter quod, non est ieiunium ab Ecclesia institutum in toto paschali tempore, nec etiam in diebus dominicis. In quibus si quis ieiunaret, contra consuetudinem populi Christiani, quae, ut Augustinus dicit, est pro lege habenda; vel etiam ex aliquo errore, sicut Manichaei ieiunant quasi necessarium tale ieiunium arbitrantes, non essent a peccato immunes, quamvis ipsum ieiunium secundum se consideratum omni tempore sit laudabile, secundum quod Hieronymus dicit, ad Lucinum, utinam omni tempore ieiunare possimus.
        
Reply to Objection 3:
 The "fasting of joy" proceeds from the instigation of the Holy Ghost Who is the Spirit of liberty, wherefore this fasting should not be a matter of precept. Accordingly the fasts appointed by the commandment of the Church are rather "fasts of sorrow" which are inconsistent with days of joy. For this reason fasting is not ordered by the Church during the whole of the Paschal season, nor on Sundays: and if anyone were to fast at these times in contradiction to the custom of Christian people, which as Augustine declares (Ep. xxxvi) "is to be considered as law," or even through some erroneous opinion (thus the Manichees fast, because they deem such fasting to be of obligation)—he would not be free from sin. Nevertheless fasting considered in itself is commendable at all times; thus Jerome wrote (Ad Lucin., Ep. lxxi): "Would that we might fast always."