# Summa Theologica

Ad tertium dicendum quod in substantia Angeli non est aliqua potentia denudata ab actu. Et similiter nec intellectus Angeli sic est in potentia, quod sit absque actu.
        
Reply to Objection 3:
 In the angel's substance there is no potentiality divested of act. In the same way, the angel's intellect is never so in potentiality as to be without act.

Ad primum ergo dicendum quod intelligere multa ut unum, est quodammodo unum intelligere.
        
Reply to Objection 1:
 To understand many things as one, is, so to speak, to understand one thing.




Ad secundum dicendum quod intellectus formatur per intelligibilem speciem quam apud se habet. Et ideo sic potest una specie intelligibili multa simul intelligibilia intueri, sicut unum corpus per unam figuram potest simul multis corporibus assimilari.
        
Reply to Objection 2:
 The intellect is informed by the intelligible species which it has within it. So it can behold at the same time many intelligible objects under one species; as one body can by one shape be likened to many bodies.




Ad tertium dicendum sicut ad primum
        
To the third objection the answer is the same as the first.

Et per hoc patet responsio ad ea quae utrinque obiiciuntur. Nam protervitas Daemonum est secundum quod non subduntur divinae sapientiae. Nescientia autem est in Angelis, non respectu naturalium cognoscibilium, sed supernaturalium. Patet etiam quod intellectus eius quod quid est semper est verus, nisi per accidens, secundum quod indebite ordinatur ad aliquam compositionem vel divisionem.
        
From all this the answers to the objections of both sides of the question are evident. For the perversity of the demons comes of their not being subject to the Divine wisdom; while nescience is in the angels as regards things knowable, not naturally but supernaturally. It is, furthermore, evident that their understanding of what a thing is, is always true, save accidentally, according as it is, in an undue manner, referred to some composition or division.